Hey, Brian. Hey, you ready to kick this show off? I am. Awesome. Everyone out there. Thanks
for being here. Put your thoughts and comments in the live stream. If you're watching live
and we'll see what we can do about making that part of the show. And with that, hello
and welcome to Python bites where we deliver Python news and headlines directly to your
earbuds. This is episode 340 recorded June 13th, 2023. I'm Michael Kennedy.
And I'm Brian Okken.
And this episode is brought to you by InfluxDV from InfluxData. Awesome. Real-time DV. So
time series database. So we're excited to tell you about that later. If you want to connect with us,
you can find us all on fosterdom.org@mkennedy@brianocken and at Python Bytes. Join us for
for the live show at pythonbytes.fm/live.
If you want to be part of the live stream
and be in the audience,
all the older video versions are there as well.
And Brian, before we jump into your first topic,
I've got some ideas, a request from the audience.
- Okay.
- Okay, so we are going to do an ask me anything episode.
And really that should be ask us anything,
but the EWA is not typically how people announce it.
It's the AMA, not EWA.
So following convention standard acronyms there,
ask us anything.
And I put together a Google form.
It is super short.
It says, what is your name?
What is your question?
And if you want, there's a few other fields for like,
second question, and things like that.
But they're optional.
So if you're listening and you've ever wondered,
I wonder if Brian has a thought, an opinion on this.
Does he have an opinion on pytest plugins?
I don't know, maybe.
Does Michael have a thought on PyCast?
Whatever, please take the time and put that in there,
and we'll give you credit on the show as well.
If you don't want to have your name in there,
just put "Anonymous" or something.
Everyone check that out.
It is at... I created a short URL for it.
Let's see, pythonbytes.fm/ama2023.
So people can just go over there and check it out.
So that's gonna be a lot of fun, Brian.
I don't know when we're scheduling it.
I'm probably pretty much when we get enough questions.
Thank you.
- Okay.
And that link will be in the show notes, right?
- Absolutely.
- Nice.
- And so, yeah, let's talk GUIs.
We haven't been on a GUI rant for a while.
- Yeah, I don't know if we've ever talked
about GUIs, I think maybe you have.
(laughing)
It's been a while.
So I ran across this website called Python GUIs
and it's like a whole website dedicated to Python GUIs.
And it's from a fellow named Martin Fitzpatrick.
He does consulting and some other stuff.
And this is pretty kind of cool.
This is fairly comprehensive.
He has tutorials and references to books
and everything like that.
But it's kind of a neat walkthrough,
just the website itself.
Like for instance, where do I begin?
His recommendation is doing PyQt6 to start with,
if you don't have a preference.
However, there's, so let's like walk through a couple.
So if you just kind of walk through,
he talks about what you should look about,
look, learn what tutorials are available.
And then it says continue.
So if you continue on with the PyQt6,
you just sort of walk through a tutorial
around how to get Qt Designer up and everything.
But there's a lot more than just Qt here.
He's got tutorials on PyQt6, Qt5, PySide, TkAndr.
There's even a tutorial, most recent tutorial I saw
was getting started with Kivy.
for GUI development and it's a pretty lengthy getting started with Kibbe thing.
So, and it covers Mac, Windows, Linux.
So, it's pretty comprehensive. It's kind of nice.
Yeah, this looks really nice.
I think choosing, I always feel like there's this paradox of choice
and when I'm thinking about Python GUIs and there's like, well, there's no real
clear answer and they're all kind of got their own oddities into them or their own
and restrictions, but this is really cool
to see them put all side by side
and then different tutorials helping you get started.
- Yeah, and yeah, I kind of like it.
I think a lot of people start with like Tkinter,
it's not Tk in there, it's a, you know, whatever,
Tinker, I forget what they call it with Python,
but it's not, I don't think that's a great place to start.
If you want something to look really nice,
if you're gonna support it.
I think I kind of agree with them.
Maybe starting with Qt or Qt, sorry.
I grew up using Qt without knowing how to pronounce it.
People do pronounce it Qt, but yeah, anyway.
So if you wanna learn about Python GUIs,
maybe check out pythonguis.com.
So what do you got for us?
Oh, you're muted.
- Before we move on, Brian, I do want to also just sort of second that, that I think, Qt,
those look like native applications that belong on your platform, right?
You're not going to like, "Oh, clearly some funky cross-platform API is what we're working
with here right now."
This stuff looks pretty solid, right?
- Yeah.
It is TK-Enter.
Why do we call it TK-Enter?
Or Tkinter?
I don't know.
'Cause it's not TK.
Oh, 'cause it's from the TK toolkit.
Got it.
- Ah, makes sense.
Got it. - Yeah, that makes sense.
- All right, I have something
for all the data scientists out there.
How about that?
- Okay.
- JupyterLab, which is the more capable,
the more IDE-like experience for Jupyter Notebooks,
4.0 is here, and it looks like a pretty mega release.
So they say, they being Jason Weil,
say the next major release
of the full feature development environment
for Jupyter is here.
It is available for install right off PyPI in Conda Forge.
So if you have it, all you gotta do is pip install
--upgrade JupyterLab
or conda install dash C Conda Forge JupyterLab.
And it'll just upgrade in place for you.
So that's pretty excellent.
That's low maintenance, low effort upgrade.
I suspect there's a lot of stuff happening
when you run those commands.
One of the big deals is JupyterLab is now faster.
There's a bunch of different ways
in which they made that happen,
where that's happening.
Notebook windowing is one of them,
where for a long notebook,
instead of trying to process and load the whole thing,
it'll just show the web browser viewport
in terms of rendering,
which will make some of the rendering faster.
Got CSS rule optimizations, CodeMirror.
CodeMirror is the editor, text editor of the cell.
So CodeMirror 6 is out and MathJax 2 as well.
So if you're working with large notebooks,
it should be much more efficient
than JupyterLab 3, they say.
- Awesome. - That's encouraging, right?
Yeah. - Yeah.
- Yeah, so cool.
Let's see what else.
There's additional performance improvements,
but you have to turn these on.
So you can get faster tab switching
on Chromium-based browsers,
which is unfortunately almost all of them,
but that's the world we live in.
So you can do, but you gotta go settings,
JupyterLab Shell, switch hidden mode to content visibility.
And for even more better performance with long notebooks,
you're gonna go Settings, Notebooks,
switch on a windowing mode to full.
Okay, so those are all options.
I told you there's a new CodeMirror.
That's the text editor for cells and file editors.
And it's upgraded to CodeMirror 6,
which has a bunch of accessibility
and performance improvements.
So people can check that out.
Let's change there.
Also, JupyterLab, I'm not sure I knew this,
comes with a real-time collaboration,
AKA Google Docs style of collaboration.
- Okay, I didn't know that they do that.
- I did not either.
I knew there were some notebook platforms that did,
but I didn't realize JupyterLab did.
So they moved this RTC, real-time collaboration,
to a separate package, JupyterCollaboration,
and that's available, it's its own sort of thing,
includes support for multiple cursors and selections,
new shared types, and yeah.
There's also a new extension manager for JupyterLab extensions.
Improved document search, UI enhancements,
like more hotkeys and other styles,
accessibility improvements, DevTool updates,
like how they build JupyterLab, so TypeScript v5 and React v18.
Most people won't care about that, but if you work on or try to customize
the JupyterLab itself, then you create an extension or something,
then you probably care.
And finally, finally, finally,
more than 100 bugs have been addressed and resolved,
making it more stable and faster.
So that sounds like a pretty big deal, doesn't it?
- Yeah, yes.
I think addressed means fixed
and not just said hello to.
- Exactly.
Hello, bug.
How shall I address you?
You shall call me a CVE, remote code execution.
Oh, hey, nice to meet you.
No, probably not like that, right?
- Yeah.
So that's cool, yeah.
- Yeah, that is cool.
Getting some thumbs up from the audience as well.
Now, before we move on,
I wanna just talk about our sponsor real quick, InfluxDB.
So thanks to Influx for supporting the show.
So this episode of Python Bytes is brought to you
by InfluxData, the makers of InfluxDB.
InfluxDB is the database purpose-built for handling time series data
at a massive scale for real-time analytics.
And developers can ingest, store, and analyze all types of time series data,
metrics, events, traces in a single platform.
So how would boundless cardinality and lightning-fast SQL queries
impact the way you develop real-time applications?
Check out Influx.
InfluxDB processes large time series data sets
and provides low latency SQL queries,
making it the go-to choice for developers
building real-time apps and seeking crucial insights.
For developer efficiency, InfluxDB
helps you create IoT, analytics, and cloud applications
using timestamped data rapidly and at scale.
It's designed to ingest billions of data points
from real-time with unlimited cardinality.
InfluxDB streamlines building ones
and deploying across the various platforms and environments
from the edge on-premises and to the cloud.
So try them for free at pythonbytes.fm/influxdb.
The link is in your podcast player show notes.
Thank you to Influx Data for supporting the show.
- Yeah, thank you.
I would like to talk about data,
but not databases, but data types.
So this is kind of early to talk about,
But hey, Brett Cannon can write about it on his blog.
I think it's fair game to talk about.
So Brett Cannon had a proposal for a new kind of data type
in Python called a struct.
Structs are new things.
We've lived with them in C for a long time
and other languages have other types.
I wanna take a slight detour before I talk about
the struct proposal from Brett.
And by proposal, I don't mean it's a pep.
I don't think it's a PEP yet.
I think it's just an idea that he had,
but I think it's a cool idea.
But one of the things he talked about
was algebraic data types.
And I gotta admit, I haven't run across that term,
algebraic data types, before like a week ago or so.
And then I've read two articles referring to it.
I'm used to ADTs being abstract data types,
which are data, you know, user defined data types.
In, I don't know what the abstract means, but anyway,
algebraic ones are things that you can compose.
They're like abstract data types,
but they're the things that you can compose like a,
you know, a list is a nil plus,
I don't know what that means, but anyway,
or trees either is composed of empty or leaf or a node
or something, I don't, I'm still not quite sure
how this makes anything to do with it,
side diversion, anyway.
So what does this look like?
And it's kind of a neat idea.
So jumping down to an example,
with a struct you could just say,
a point is a struct that takes X and Y
and they're both integers, say.
And they have to be named or either positional or named,
but they cannot be unnamed only.
I don't know why, but,
and then it'd be kind of like named classes
or named tuples to access it.
So you just access the stuff.
So you just declare this point, it takes X and Y,
and then you can get at it with like, say, P.X or P.Y.
And that's it really.
So what is this?
Why would we need this?
And I think it'd be really pretty cool
to have something that simple.
And these structs would be, they not allow inheritance.
They would have no methods currently.
No methods, no inheritance, and they're not mutable.
So you can't change the thing in it.
Why is that important?
Well, then you can use these things for keys
and dictionaries and things like that.
And I just think this would be kind of cool
because I still with data types, even with data types
and all the other goodies and adders
and other goodies we have within Python.
I still use named tuple a lot
and I would totally use this for a lot of stuff
and make it, especially if it was super fast.
So that's the idea.
Got any ideas? - It looks interesting.
And the defining syntax,
it's kind of a one liner a little bit,
as you pointed out, like a named tuple,
but it actually, it defines a class-like thing
with these optimizations, for example, Dunder slots.
And kind of a data classes type thing
with Dunder equal and Dunder hash.
So for people listening, you just say,
all in one line, struct, point a capital B for the type,
parenthesis X comma Y, that's the whole thing, right?
- Yeah.
- Tony out in the audience does wonder
if it actually requires type annotations
or if those are optional.
>> Yes, they're optional, but I like them, so I don't know.
>> No, Brett says in his article,
he would propose that they would be
optional if you just had two elements in something.
I mean, it's-
>> Yeah, it seems consistent with Python that it would be optional, right?
>> Yeah.
>> Tony also says, "Oh boy,
I just started writing some Rust code at work,
so I'm interested in this for Python."
>> Yeah, and the example that Brett gave of this point,
He then showed the example of what under the hood
that would give you that you don't have to write.
And this example of like being able to convert it
to a dictionary and replace parameters and using slots.
And I mean, there's a lot of code here
that you don't need to write.
And yes, we do kind of have data type,
data classes that sort of do this,
but data classes are not,
they're not optimized for data,
for having lots and lots of them.
So this would be like an optimization
to have just like huge, huge data structure
full of these things and have it still be fast.
So I think it'd be cool.
- And having it be part of the language,
you know, maybe they could do optimizations around it
for Python 3.14 or whatever, you know,
or whatever, you know, the faster CPython story.
Like, for example, if you know it's immutable,
could you make it allocate on just the stack
and not actually go to the heap or things like this, right?
It'd be interesting.
Maybe that's a bridge too far, but...
- I'm also interested in how this maps to, like, hardware.
Because dealing with registers and hardware interfaces,
there's--using C, we often have structs that we overlay
over the top of, like, shared memory systems.
systems and this might be great use for something like that.
- A few more thoughts out there.
Grant says, "This is in line with what Mojo expresses.
"We recently spoke about them.
"Would love to have a struct in Python."
And Blaze points out, "Waiting for Hanik's opinion."
Maybe something like this will get into Adders.
Yeah, we'll see.
Sometimes, Brian, it's about putting new stuff,
new things into Python.
Sometimes, however, it's about ripping it out.
Yes.
So my next item is the realization of PEP 594.
So PEP 594, for those of you who don't know,
I interviewed Christian Himes and Brett Cannon,
speaking of Brett Cannon,
he gets a back-to-back mention here
about removing Python's dead batteries.
and this pep594.
And the idea is there's stuff in Python
that makes no sense to be in Python.
It made sense when we had a world without the internet,
when there was no concept of pip install,
and you really needed to kind of have Python
come with a lot of its capabilities.
But now, if you go over to pypi.org,
what is the current number?
we have 460,000 packages.
They're revolving, like a larger definition
of what Python is really, really fast, right?
- Yeah.
- So for example, do you think it would make sense
potentially to have an implementation
of an async chat client built into the standard library
of Python?
Maybe not.
- I didn't know we had that.
- Well, apparently we did until 3.12.
So that's not actually out yet,
but it's gone or like an SMTP daemon built into Python.
Who should be running their own mail client
as part of Python itself?
Not even a separate package.
But more importantly, as was discussed over on the podcast,
like this is overhead for all the core devs.
Do we want them working on things like the struct
or do we want them still managing--
- CGS. - Yeah.
I like audio parsing for expired.
Nobody uses any more audio formats or CGI
or telnet libraries or, you know, like chat clients.
So this basically is the announcement
by Victor Stinner, I believe, saying,
we just removed 19 modules from Python 3.13
standard library.
These are the ones that have already been deprecated
in 3.11 by pep594.
So yeah, it's a big long list of them.
Like I said, like you pointed out some CGI image header,
you know, male stuff.
Also talks a little bit about the 3.12 and 3.11 ones
which are gone.
And then finally it does say like, if this affects you,
here's what you can do.
Do nothing, just stay on 3.11.
It says, "In my opinion, it is a dangerous long-term choice.
However, you can do nothing.
You could create a group of volunteers
to give life to this module, right?"
The module is open source in the sense
that Python's standard library is open source.
So you go in there, you copy the files out,
you make a PyPI package for it,
and you find people who want to keep it going.
- Yeah, or you vendor it.
You could copy the removed module
just into your code itself, right?
Often it's just a .py file,
so you just vendor it in if you have to.
Honestly, that kind of seems like a pretty decent idea
if you're like going low key
and you don't wanna take on an open source project
to remain, to maintain CGI.
You just like, I just need this to run.
So you can copy that over.
And then there's a whole discussion on stuff around this,
right, if you want.
Anyway, 20 standard lib modules, they're out.
- Yeah, I think it's a good thing.
Just like, yeah, changing your batteries,
kind of like your smoke detectors.
- Yeah, exactly.
One more audience comment on this before we move on.
Grant says, "Happy for the Python core devs
"to kill all these modules.
"Nothing makes senior engineers happier
"than calling bodies of code that aren't worth their weight."
I totally agree.
I would be happy, honestly, to see even a thinner,
thinner, smaller Python standard library,
and then have more of these as pip installs.
But then when you install Python,
it could like kind of come pre-installed
with 20 or 30 packages
that if you want to upgrade them separately,
or I don't know.
So for things like if I want to run this on MicroPython,
I wouldn't run it on WebAssembly under PyScript.
Like those situations are like,
you don't, the whole huge standard library is a problem.
So I don't know, I feel like
there's interesting stuff happening here,
But this is a good start.
>>Yeah, definitely.
I think it is.
>>It is.
And is that all of our items?
I believe it is, isn't it?
>>It is.
And so some of these decisions are
made by some of the core Python people, maybe on the Python
board, have something to do with some of this, perhaps.
So if the elections for--
so one of our extras, I'd like to mention
that the PSF announced that you need,
if you care about elections,
you kind of need to affirm your PSF membership
voting status before the 15th.
So the cutoff is only a couple days from now.
And I'm glad somebody mentioned this.
I can't remember where I saw it
because it sort of went to my email inbox
and I forgot to look.
So I just affirmed my voting status this morning.
Excellent.
Well, I definitely affirmed mine a couple of days ago.
So it's all good.
But yeah, thanks for pointing out here.
This is great.
OK.
Do you have any extras?
I do.
I just released a video collab with Shulian Saquir
and Bob Belderbose from the PyBytes guys,
about five tips for budding Python developers,
five career tips for budding Python developers
as a 25 minute YouTube video.
So people can check that out.
That link is in your show notes
if that sounds interesting to you.
- It looks like Julian and Iron Man
are looking at the same thing.
- Julian has an Iron Man painting
in the background behind him
and they've got the same basic expression.
Pretty awesome.
So people can check that out.
Also, PyCon US 2023.
Remember that Brian?
It was a while ago.
- Yeah, all the videos are out.
- The videos are out.
- Yay.
- Yay, so there are some that are unavailable
that are hidden.
I'm wondering if that's intentional
or if that's like they were uploaded and hidden
and they're just forgot to be set to public.
So whoever's in charge of this might wanna look
why there's hidden videos published to this playlist.
But I don't know how many there are.
There's 142 videos, possibly some others as well
that are hidden on this playlist.
So people can check it out.
This is basically all of PyCon,
including the tutorials,
if you wanna go and kind of be part of that side of PyCon,
which is excellent.
- Nice.
So some are white and some are kind of this gray color.
Do you know what the difference is?
No.
- No idea.
I think it's just the font,
just the opening slide they use for their presentation.
I don't know if there's more to read into it than that.
I would like to maybe, I don't know if the people
who are organizing next year's PyCon are listening.
I would like to propose just some kind of suggestion
that might make this a little easier for them
because this seems to be like a huge challenge
from what I can tell, right?
PyCon was in April, it's the middle of June
and now the videos have come out.
So somebody has spent, you know,
like a month and a half working on these videos
and the community has been waiting a month and a half
to get them, right?
Brian, how quickly is our video for Python Bytes out
when we're done with it?
- Like right when we're done.
- I mean, like literally you could seek around in it
as you like part of the stream, right?
We're just live streaming this using something
like StreamYard.
And I know that there's a pay to attend virtually.
So maybe you don't want to have a public stream
that people can use.
Maybe there's, but this kind of just live streaming it
to YouTube, even if that's an unlisted URL
that you then, when the conference is over,
is flipped to public.
'Cause I know that kind of, you don't necessarily
don't want that to be going,
have that whole live experience
if you're not part of the,
I signed up for the virtual pass, which is great, it's fine.
But I think we could get these videos in a lot quicker
and help people a lot if you did something like,
you just kind of live streamed it.
I know people might worry about the connectivity
and it cutting out the quality, but with, for example,
StreamYard, it records local video, it's maximum quality.
So there's, if they had a stream deck
where they can switch the views
and they had this going and recording locally,
these videos would be out as quick as you could click from
unlisted to public on YouTube.
I do want to, I guess disagree with you on that. Okay. So
Pike, so Pike cascades, for one did the, the I don't know if it
was available right away, but it was available soon after the
entire day recordings, she had the day recordings. So if you if
you wanted to find yours or something or find somebody's you
could kind of scroll through and find it. It was a little it was a
a little, it was just sort of going,
there wasn't any editing.
So it was kind of hard to deal with.
I don't know how many people really watched those,
but the PyCon US videos,
I didn't realize this at first, somebody corrected me.
They were available to people that either attended live
or attended virtually,
but didn't get to go to all the videos.
the online experience included being able to go in and watch videos,
the other videos that you missed. So those were available right away.
I didn't know about it, so maybe advertising it more.
And also it was a little hard to get to, I gotta say it wasn't,
it wasn't easy. I, I kind of would like to have,
like the schedule that you go into if you're logged in,
and you can see the schedule.
why not have that be able to just link to the video
that you missed or something like that?
I don't know, there's better ways
to make it a little bit easier.
It was a little hard to deal with, but it was available.
And I also think like, for instance,
going back to "Pike Cascades," I did a talk.
The recording, the full day one had like glitches
and had me up there at the beginning
trying to get the audio ready.
And there's this getting started stuff,
Whereas having somebody be able to clean that up a bit
would be good.
It's just, I do also,
but I don't think that this is a long time
from when PyCon really was to now that's,
that's what month and a half?
- I think it's too long.
- That's too long.
- Yeah, I think it's too long.
- So.
- Last year, 2022 was three months, I believe.
I mean, it's a long time.
- And I know it's a lot of work,
but maybe we could do something,
either having rough cut ones out there initially,
or maybe have some of us volunteer.
I mean, I think we could have some volunteers
to help clean them up for like good enough for now
or sort of things.
I don't know, something.
- Yeah, I agree.
We should have made this a whole item, I suppose,
if we're talking this much.
Final thought is like with StreamYard,
I don't know about the other ones.
You can literally go in before you hit publish,
you can just say, "Trim this end,"
and go to click, click, okay, put it on YouTube now.
And then like, that would be, you know, not very much.
I agree that you don't want all the setup in that chunk.
are like welcome i'm brian i'm talking about extensions etc right like straight away and i
can't get the slides to work and you know yeah exactly i know you want to skip all that crap
okay um but good news the videos are out and people can check them out okay next uh next next next uh
couple version updates for Python Python 3 11 4 3 10 12 3 9 17 3 8 17 3 7 17 and
Importantly 3 12 beta 2 are all out and you might be
Interested to know that both the 311 and 310 I suppose the others include security fixes. Oh and nice to meet you. Mr
CVE
for example
Some some problems that were solved in open SSL are now included
There's a one two, three, four five six seven
eight maybe seven or eight
CVS that were addressed on open SSL and some URL parsing and you you decode and things that might look
Like you want to get fixed so check that out and you know upgrade if you can
Play them bites is already running 311 for so hooray for that by the by set of them. I
I had a friend say they were working on upgrading to 3.10
and I'm like, I don't even remember 3.10.
I've been like on 3.11 for so long.
Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
All right, and then final call.
Just remember the Python Bytes AMA form.
Please get out there and submit that one more time.
Link's in the show notes.
Yes.
Yes, right at the top.
Ready for a joke?
I am.
This one comes to us from Ken Van Wick
and it's a follow on from the apple.com.
Where's there, there it is, their vision pro.
Right, yeah, this thing is super expensive.
It looks really amazing.
I just, I don't, I've not got faith
that it's gonna take off.
But the ability to say like, I wanna sit,
I wanna stand on the sideline right at the goal line
at the Super Bowl and be able to look around and watch that as if I was there, like that
would be epic.
Is that worth a $3,500 device?
Now Brian, it's expensive, but did you know, just like the Mac Pro, which was also recently
announced the Mac Pro, super expensive, $7,000 minimum, but it doesn't come with the wheels.
If you buy it with the wheels, the wheels are $400 separate, right?
You have to get the wheel for your case.
So this is kind of like that.
- This comes to us from Kim Benwick
and he says, actually this is Paul Mason's thing.
So you got,
so you've got your $3,499 Vision Pro
and it comes with the Apple branded $899 snorkel.
(laughing)
What do you think of that?
- I think that's cool.
And actually, - I love it.
- No, I think, yeah.
If you could, if this would actually work,
would work underwater so that you could go back out
in your swimming pool and you could look like
you're actually on a coral reef, that'd be cool.
- That would be awesome.
Imagine you were in here playing something like Subnautica,
one of those types of games, which is just amazing.
Like a game where you're underwater and exploring.
But in VR with your Apple snorkel on,
think how real that would be.
- Yeah, but actually underwater, like,
but they're probably not. - Yes, exactly.
- Yeah. (laughs)
That's pretty cool.
- Oh boy.
Well, that's what I got for you all.
$899 Apple Snorkel, not included.
- Yeah.
Cool.
- All right. - Nice.
- Well, yeah, very fun.
Thank you everyone for the active chat in the live stream.
Thank you for everyone who listened,
no matter how you listen.
And Brian, thanks as always.
- Thank you.